The assembly code is generated by the GCC compiler and is specific to the x86-64 architecture. It is the assembly language representation of the C program that checks the endianness of the machine.

The first line '.file "endianness.c"' indicates the source file name. The '.text' and '.section .rodata' are assembler directives and they define different sections of the code.

The next two lines '.LC0' and '.LC1' define two strings, "Little endian" and "Big endian" respectively, these will be used later in the program.

The '.globl main' and '.type main, @function' indicate that the following code is for the main function and it is globally accessible.

The main function starts with 'main:', it first saves the previous base pointer value to the stack, then it sets the new base pointer value to the stack pointer, this is done for the purpose of stack frame creation. Then it reserves some space on the stack for local variables.

Then it sets a variable num to 1, and creates a pointer 'c' which points to the address of num. Then it loads the value at the memory address pointed to by c into the register 'eax', and tests the least significant byte of the register against 0.

If the least significant byte is 0, it means that the value stored at the memory address is 0, and therefore the machine is big endian. The code will jump to '.L2' where it will call the 'puts' function to print the string "Big endian" and then jump to '.L3'

Otherwise, if the least significant byte is non-zero, it means that the value stored at the memory address is non-zero, and therefore the machine is little endian. The code will call the 'puts' function to print the string "Little endian".

Then the code sets the return value to 0 and performs some cleanup before returning from the function.

In summary, this assembly code is checking the endianness of the machine by loading a value of 1 into a variable, creating a pointer to that variable, loading the value at the memory address pointed to by the pointer, and testing the least significant byte of that value. Depending on the result, the code will print "Little endian" or "Big endian" to the console.